[ Music ]
[ Flowing Water ]
>> Few subjects create
more divisiveness
in today's world than hunting.
Well, we've all come a long
way in our ability to weigh
in on the factors of
conservancy, animal rights
and human need, there're
still highly emotional charges
involved in this discussion.
Tovar Cerulli has stepped right
into the center of the debate.
Once a vegan, he's now
what he refers to as a
"Mindful Carnivore" and
he's here to share his story
which portions of it are
difficult for some people.
I'd have to come to grips
with this as you have.
But as a man, your deep
tradition has been in the world
of fishing and hunting
before you became a vegan.
So I think we need to
start with the beginning
of your story 'cause it gets
more intense as we get into it.
>> Sure.
>> So how-- when you were a
little kid, you were fishing
with your dad's friend
name, Willie?
>> Uh-hmm.
>> And this was a big
part of your life.
And let's talk about how your
life started out and how organic
that may have been
and how natural it may
or may not have been for you.
>> Uh-hmm.
Yeah, you know, as a kid I spent
a lot of time in the outdoors,
in the summers in New England
and fishing was a
wonderful experience for me,
and Willie was a
wonderful mentor.
And it wasn't something that
I was reflective about as,
you know, a 4 or
6, 8, 10 year old.
>> Sure.
>> But it felt quite, you know,
quite protocol and natural
and affirming for me to be
able to get food from the land,
from the water in that case.
So that was a-- was a
wonderful experience.
As a boy, I didn't do any
hunting except for, you know,
catching some frogs as a kid.
So it was-- it was pretty much
a fishing experience as a boy.
>> And then later on you came
across or were given a BB gun
and then it kind-- things kind
of accelerated a little bit
from there in terms
of the breath
of which what you could connect
with or what you could hunt.
How did-- how did the
BB figure into it?
>> You know what,
what it primary is,
it changed the possibilities
in terms of a--
well, my occasional
outing is to catch frogs.
Mostly I just planked the tin
can or something like that.
But it did change, rather
than having to swim around
and catch a kind of
weary bullfrog by hand,
I have the option
of using a BB gun
and being five yards
away and taking a shot.
And so it changed
technologically.
It changed that process
quite a bit.
>> But as a kid that you were
so pretty comfortable with that.
I mean every boy had
BB guns around their--
at the time I assumed.
I remember I was shot right here
with a BB gun when I was little.
>> Yeah [laughs].
>> [Laughs] With
my neighbor boy.
>> Right, yeah, I was--
I didn't, again,
it was reflective--
>> Yeah.
>> -- about that process either.
It was, you know,
part of getting food.
And I didn't really
think much more about it.
>> And didn't you and
Willie kind of once you--
once you caught your fish,
you'd had a nice little fry
out then you have fresh fish?
>> Oh sure, sure, you know.
>> So.
>> It was, you know, minutes
or you know, it took me less
than an hour from
water to plate,
and so we enjoyed the
eating as well, yeah.
>> I don't think I have
ever experienced the taste
of a fresh fish.
But my understanding is it's a--
it's a different octave in terms
of the flavor and the-- just the
aliveness of the fish itself.
When you-- have you ever
eaten cultivated fish
from a grocery store?
>> Yeah, I have.
I think there is a difference.
It depends a lot on
the kind of fish.
>> Uh-hmm.
>> Whether they're oily or
not, how well they keep or not.
But yeah, fresh fish is a
different I think altogether.
>> Yeah, altogether.
[laughs] Well, it's interesting
because as time went on,
as you became a young
man and then went
into your collage years, you
start being exposed to a lot
of other philosophies.
And one of them was
vegetarianism,
the philosophy of, you know,
do no harm and so forth.
So now, give us an idea of
what happened in that part
of the journey for you.
Who you were exposed to,
what you are exposed to
and how you took
that information on?
>> You know, first I
started just getting
to know vegetarians.
I haven't known that many.
I mean my parents
were part of the sort
of 60s, 70s counterculture.
>> Uh-hmm.
>> So I knew vegetarians
and, you know,
I ate tofu on occasions.
But my girlfriend late
in high school she
and her family were
all vegetarian.
That was fine with me.
I enjoyed the food that
we shared together.
And yet for me, the shift
didn't come until I was 20
and it was back to fishing.
I had been at a week long
retreat with Thich Nhat Hanh
and really doing mindfulness
meditation including related
to food and they were
certain vegetarian food
and he talked about
vegetarianism.
And sometimes shortly
thereafter I went fishing
as I had done many times as
a kid and caught this trout
and brought it to, you know,
to the cutting board and it was
in that moment and that's how I
opened the book, is that scene
of pausing and realizing, you
know, I don't need to do this.
And the fish is already out
in the water and already dying
and I did kill it, but I felt
a lot of regret in that moment
and realized I could
have had rice,
I could have had vegetables.
I could have had something else.
This fish did not need to die
or experience being caught.
And so I decided then
that was, you know,
the end of eating other
creatures, flesh, you know.
And it didn't take too long to
get to veganism, thereafter.
>> And from there.
>> From a place of compassion
and animal welfare concerns
of then extended to
environmental impacts
of the meat industry and, you
know, other places as well.
>> So, through education it
seemed like a logical step
for you at that time
and I understand that.
I did it in the blinding flash
for the exact same reason.
And it had more to do with,
you have a quote in your book
from Gandhi, "The life of
a lamb is no less precious
than the life of a human,"
right, and it goes on from there
and that is what the experience
I had besides a couple
of strange ones.
[laughs] It was just
kind of embarrassing.
Frying chicken, one time
and in fact I would say I was
smoking pot when I was cooking
so at that time I heard the
chicken legs screaming at me
when I put them in the frying
pan and I couldn't get rid
of that sense that
these legs were walking
around just a short
time before that.
And that was kind
of the beginning
and for me the understanding
of the [inaudible] industry
and how they were
raising these little cubs.
So, when it culminated like
you I just quit overnight
which was not an easy thing
to do in the day because you--
it's a big learning curve
for your body, for your mind
to gather your foods, and
what was that like for you
when you did that, when
you just cut it off?
>> You know, I didn't find
it that difficult partly
because I'd already been
exposed to vegetarian food
of various kinds and,
you know, a large part
of my diet did not
include, you know,
meat and fish and so on already.
So, I didn't really have much
difficulty with that process
of just changing
the diet and coping.
>> What year was that roughly?
>> It was 91.
>> Okay.
>> 1991 early 90s so.
>> So vegetarianism was already
well underway by that time
>> Oh yeah, oh yeah, absolutely.
>> So there were
cookbooks, I mean--
>> That's right.
>> That makes a lot easier once
you have some guides out there.
>> Yeah. I had tradition
behind me, you know?
>> Yes. [laughs] And so, it
wasn't a small leap then largely
for you to decide that if
you're going to take this on
and embrace it then you needed
to go with your own gardening
and taking responsibility
for your own food.
It's a very conscious journey.
So let's talk about
what happened from there
when you decided to unplug from
the industrial agribusiness.
>> Yeah, I mean I think that
I would be sort of arrogant
or maybe a lot of foods
[inaudible] say that I unplugged
from industry agribusiness
is very hard thing to do.
And I actually in my early
20s, my last year of college,
I was living in New
York City and,
you know, I wasn't gardening.
>> Right, right.
>> I could be occasionally at--
to a Farmer's Market in Union
Square, but you know, I was,
you know, getting organic
produce when I could
and it was still I
think fairly industrial.
But when I left the city
and when my current wife
and I got together, she'd
been gardening for a long time
and I had some experience
as a kid gardening.
But for her making a home in
Great Park meant making a garden
and so we embark
on that together
and it was a great experience
to have that direct connection
with the earth and the planting
and harvesting our vegetables.
It'd be some portion of
them right from, you know,
from our front yard and
so I certainly enjoyed
that experience.
>> What about the notion
of the commercial
slaughter house industries?
Where did that figure in?
I mean one is, thou shall do no
harm or whatnot in your mind,
you know, to unplug from
the notion of the need
to eat animals when there
are other things available.
But what about the commercial
aspect of anima, not we--
I wouldn't even call it
husbandry, but slaughter house.
>> Yeah, well, and
slaughter house is the end
but it's the whole
factory farming process.
>> Exactly.
>> And the whole life if
one can call it that--
>> Right.
>> A life of, you know,
confinement and suffering.
So yeah, that was
I guess in my mind
and in some ways still
remains in my mind
with the ultimate disrespect
and what the philosopher
Val Plumwood, she called it,
sort of the reduction of
animal lives to living to meat,
you know, treating
them in that way.
So that was the thing I
am most wanted to avoid.
I was also avoiding fishing
and also avoiding even
things I did myself--
>> Right.
>> -- as a vegetarian.
But sure, I mean that
sort of processing
of lives was what I
wanted to avoid the most.
>> Yeah. And as your
explorations went on,
it became really more complex
because now, you're gardening
and you're looking at the use of
say an herbicide or a pesticide
or something like this.
And then you started looking
at the notion of well,
if you're not going to
kill, what does this mean.
And now I'm killing the insects
or whatever that are involved,
that are ravaging my garden and
the protective element comes up.
So talk about where you
went in all of that.
>> My first recognitions
about vegetarianism perhaps not
being quite what I thought it
was-- was reading about
the impacts of agriculture
in a broad sense not
just my personal garden
that my wife and
I were attending.
But the industrial
landscape changed like being
out wild like habitats.
>> Right.
>> You know talk about the
ultimate disrespect of animals.
>> Yes.
>> You've not only wipe them
out but you wiped up their home.
You potentially wiped
out their species
if you do it widely enough.
And realizing that large
industrial machinery going
across farm field, just you
know, chopping up creatures
and nests and driving
them out of the fields
where they had settled and
adapted to that habitat.
I also found leading
that white-tailed deer
which are the most
common big animal, well,
cattle too I guess
are more common.
>> Right.
>> But just a wide animal
so that the most common
wild large animal,
they have rebounded incredibly
over the past century and all
across the country,
they are shot constantly
to protect soybean fields,
to protect all kinds of crops
and that was disturbing, but
I could still distance it
in some way 'cause like,
well that's somewhere else.
That's industrial far
away Midwest, you know.
Then I discovered that well,
the farmer down the road,
little organic farm
where my wife
and I would go pick
organic strawberries.
They shoot deer too and they
smoke bomb woodchuck burrows all
the time so we can get berries
and kale and whatever else.
And then the lasts stage,
the closes to home was
the garden was realizing
that here the cucumber beetles
wiping up the squash plants.
Now I'm not going
to use pesticides.
I have to go out there in
the morning when it's cold
and they are moving kind
of slow and crash them.
>> Right.
>> Otherwise they wipe it out.
>> And then the sort
of a final encounter
in that regard was
woodchucks getting
into our garden despite
the fence and everything
and realizing-- either
I actually take this on
and kill a woodchuck, or
I keep buying more greens
from the local farmer
who's killing woodchucks.
So, I can choose whether I do
it by proxy or do it firsthand
but it's going to happen,
one way or the other.
That was uncomfortable.
And in that phase, my wife
and I were still vegetarian.
We're still vegan.
>> Uh-hmm.
>> But those recognitions
as well as the recognition
that we were fertilizing
our garden with manure
from local cows and
chickens and other animals,
we were definitely involved.
This is what our
vegetables were eating.
We'd find a chuck of bone in the
composed, you know, the manure--
>> Right.
>> It's like, okay, you know,
we are intimately linked
with animal life and death.
So we didn't change
our diet at the point.
But our ideas are rigid
black and white notions
about what food ethics meant
and how pure we could be
and how disconnected we could
be from animal life and death,
that shifted and
softened at that point.
>> It's a very complex
web of life.
>> Uh-hmm.
>> And you're right you can't
separate the animal life.
And having, I've gone the
distance a few times too
and when impossible
and had my own garden,
and one of the things
we did to try to avoid
that issue is you
do a couple of--
dig a couple feet
deep and then lined
up with very fined wire mesh
so that the larger ones
couldn't come up underneath.
>> Right, right.
>> And then depending
on what was in the air,
maybe even put a little like a
little cage over the top of it.
But the depths and
lengths you have to go to,
to get a garden growing without
a lot of critters chewing
on it is pretty extreme.
>> Yeah. And our fence
was about a foot or so
down to prevent the easy,
you know, under burrowing.
>> Right, the gophers
and all that.
>> But we have very sandy
soil so it's easy digging.
And so when this
woodchuck burrow popped
up not near the fence but like
in the middle of the garden.
>> Right.
>> You know, I didn't even know
where the other end
of the burrow was.
They could go deep and long
and they have good aim.
>> Yeah [laughs].
>> And they're here, in
the middle of the garden.
>> And so, as-- so you were
contemplating all of this
and looking at where do animals
and plants and humans end
and the other begin and you
realized this a complex.
But something else was going
on in addition to that,
you were starting to
really crave animal protein.
What was going on now
with you and your wife
and your bodies during
this time?
>> Uh-hmm.
>> This is a really big one.
A lot of people watching this
are vegans, even raw foodists
or vegetarians and I've been
through this whole journey
over the course of 30 years
that you have as well.
It's hard.
>> Yeah.
>> When you have
philosophical issues at stake.
>> Yeah, it is.
I had some health
compelled issues,
nothing really frightening,
nothing life threatening.
But my energy was low, my immune
system wasn't doing superbly,
my allergies were more active
than they had been
some years before.
And at the time my wife was
studying holistic nutrition
and herbal medicine and so on.
And one or two of the
instructors that she had talked
about the vegans that
they were seeing who had,
not had been vegan for a
little while but had been vegan
for 20 years or so
and were coming
in with some real depletions in
their bodies, some real lacks
of that particular nutrients.
And so she encouraged
this instructor
and particularly encouraged
her students including my wife
to think about these
things, whatever their diet.
And so my wife suggested
to me, you know,
maybe it will be worth
considering to making a shift.
We also at the time our doctor
was a Buddhist naturopath.
You know, not a supporter
of meeting potatoes diet--
>> Right.
>> You know, standard
American diet
by any stretch of
the imagination.
But she too looking
at my blood chemistry
and how my health was going
said, "You know, you might want
to think about doing something a
little different with your diet.
>> Yeah.
>> I think because
we had already gone
through that previous evolution
of recognizing the
interconnections,
recognizing that the life and
death of animals was connected
to our vegetables in a variety
of ways that helped us be ready
because our attitudes
had already softened
around the issues.
So we took that radical step of
having the first bowl of yogurt,
you know [laughter] which
is-- if you've been vegan.
>> If you've been vegan
that's a radical step.
>> You've been a vegan
for a decade, you know,
I've been vegan for about a
decade that feels strange.
And then when we also added in
a bit of wild fish and a bit
of local chicken, it was
a very strange experience.
The flavor, the texture,
the idea,
the philosophical emotional idea
of this was a living creature
that I'm consuming
now was uncomfortable.
It was certainly strange.
>> When I went through
the same thing, it was--
I was losing some strength.
I was having internal issues.
I mean my whole digestive
elimination tract seemed
like it was just kind
of shutting down.
It wasn't vital any longer
and I was having other signs
of protein depletion
which I was ignoring
for years as a matter of fact.
And I finally went to a
doctor, British fellow
who was well known in the area.
He was an MD but he was
also highly intuitive.
So I meditated on
at that morning.
Before I went in, I
thought, "Oh my God.
What's going on?"
I need to do something.
And what I saw in the
meditation was a red steak,
medium rare steak and a big
glass of red wine and I thought,
"No, no, I don't think so."
So I went in and I thought
he'll give me some other news
that I can really use.
This isn't an option.
And he said, "Well I have to
tell you Regina [phonetic],
what I'm seeing is you
really need red meat."
And so after that
validation I thought,
"Okay, I'll take it on."
And so at the time I had a
friend who was really good
at barbecuing, so we--
and my son was there.
They knew this was
a very big deal.
No one was talking about it,
they're making small chat,
and finally, the
barbecue was done.
I ate all the vegetables on
the plate and this little piece
of steak was sitting there
in the middle of the plate
and I remember I started crying
and I just had salty tears
running down onto the plate.
And I took a bite, you know, it
was odd, it'd been many years,
it was odd, then I took another,
and then I gabbled
the rest of up.
I had been going by Sizzler
billboard, the cheapest worst,
well, I shouldn't
say it but, you know,
not super high quality meat.
And I was practically salivating
driving by the sizzler billboard
between Sedona and
[inaudible] something is off.
And when I ate it
I felt fabulous.
It was no rejection
of it and everything.
So I did it a couple
of times a week
and my body started regaining
strength and recovering.
It was a very big deal
to do that, but it's--
if you have to choose
a philosophy
or your physical health
and body and on life
that becomes another dilemma.
>> Yeah. And I didn't
experience the--
that visceral craving of like
the billboard experience.
[laughter] But once I did
start eating, you know,
just like yogurt or some eggs,
you know, and then some chicken
and fish, my body also
seemed to welcome it.
My body felt just fine with it.
There was no, as
you say rejection.
There was never a
flavor I missed.
It wasn't like I pined away for
10 years for the flavor of--
the flavor actually felt very--
tasted very strange
and the experience--
>> Yeah.
>> -- are very strange,
but my body, you know,
my physical being seem quite
happy to have that back in diet,
even though it wasn't a major.
It wasn't returned into a
steak and potatoes family--
>> Right.
>> -- at all, but just having--
>> Just start adding
some of that.
>> Some of that, just
having some of that,
my body was quite happy.
>> Now at this time
did you go back
to fishing for your own food?
>> Yeah, at that point, you
know, we were eating fish
and some local chicken
and I said, "Okay,
I want to be involved in this."
I want to-- just like
gardening I want to be involved,
but unlike gardening
with the exception
of occasional woodchuck and, you
know, depredations by insects,
you know, fishing is about
killing and eating, you know,
flashes about killing for
the specific purpose not
as a side effect, not as
an unattended consequence
of agriculture but as an
intentional, this is food.
So yeah, I went back to fishing.
I reconnected with Willie, who
was my mentor when I was a kid
and he still have the fillet
knife that I had sent to him
when I went vegan, after few
years I sent him this fillet
knife and said, "I'm
done with this,"
but it has a good memories.
We used it together when I
was a kid and he held onto it.
And when I told him I was
thinking about fishing
and I have the scene in the
book where he says, you know,
"You want that knife back?"
>> Yeah, it was [inaudible]
type thing.
>> And he asked it like in his
bedside table, he like-- new.
He was-- he wouldn't throw
in some box somewhere.
>> He was waiting for you.
>> He was waiting for me to
return to the water in that way.
>> In this mix, you also started
examining the nature of forest
and forestry and logging,
a very big part of the web
of life on this planet.
Why did you do that and
what was your experience?
How long are you involve
and what did it teach you?
>> Yeah, my main reason was that
I wanted to know the landscape
that I lived in, the
forested landscape
in Northern New England,
in Vermont.
I want to understand it better,
particularly in the sense
that we heat our house
with firewood primarily.
And I had worked as a
carpenter for a number of years
and had handled lumber.
And yet I had no connection
to where it came from
and I still have a real
discomfort with logging trucks,
rolling by and it was--
>> I know it looked like a truck
of bed full of dead bodies.
>> Yeah, you know, the sound of
chain saw was in the distance,
you know, all those
things still bothered me,
and yet here I am constantly
using wood for a variety.
I live in a wooden house.
I heat it with wood.
I build with wood.
I use paper, all
of these things.
And I said, you know, I
know it can be done badly.
I know there's logging that
is very rough on the land
and very rough on ecosystems.
But I also believe
it can be done well.
I read I bit about
sustainable forestry
so how is that done, you know?
So, pinned this to a local guy
who was a forester and a logger,
so he had, you know, he knew
ecology and forest systems
and he went out there
and implemented it
and run his own little
logging operation.
He was going to take me on
to work with him and learn
with him, and it was great.
It was a great experience
and the first time
of not just cutting
trees already down,
but cutting a living
tree, a big, you know.
>> How was that for you?
>> It was strange, you know, I
wanted to apologize to the tree.
>> I would feel that way, yes.
>> Before I felt it.
>> Yeah.
>> 'Cause this is, you
know, a living being.
>> It's been around for
usually kind of long time.
>> And this is one, you know,
it's not a giant tree, but,
you know, maybe a 50
foot tall pine tree.
It's been around for,
you know, maybe 40 years.
And I had to pause and really
kind of bite that moment.
Once I started doing
it, I started to realize
that I had always been pretty
comfortable with farm fields.
And I'm comfortable with
stumps in the woods.
I realized, one is tidier like
the farm field is kind of tidy
at least what I usually
see of it driving by,
not all the nitty-gritty maybe
but the log forest
looks kind of messy.
But trees grow back in a
forest that's been gently
or well logged, you
know, maybe generate.
They never regenerate
in the farm field.
>> No.
>> That's ex-forest.
>> Right.
>> And I start to realize
that there was a certain
aesthetic prejudice
that I had toward logging
or against logging.
And it became a very good
experience, you know,
to bring home fire wood.
I knew where it came from.
I knew what we had done
and how we had done it.
And for me all of this journey
has remain connected to some
of Thich Nhat Hanh's
teachings and mindfulness,
and particularly this
phrase interbeing
by which he means
understanding the complexities.
And he has this wonderful line,
paragraph in one of his books,
where he talks about
the book itself
that you're reading
and the paper.
And he says, "There is
sunshine and there is land,
and there is rain in this
book, in this paper."
And he also says,
"And there's a logger,
and there's a mill somewhere."
So he acknowledges that maybe
darker side that sense that--
>> Well, the reality.
>> Yeah.
>> The reality.
And collectively agreed upon
reality that this is acceptable
to promote this, so to speak.
And really-- and again,
everything you're talking
about has the same thing in
mind which is in the title
of your book which is being
mindful of each of these things.
It doesn't mean we necessarily
need to make a different choice,
but we have to be mindful
of the consequences
in what we are choosing, and
the whole subject of forestry
which I too find fascinating
and the exploitation
that has occurred.
That's something
that I think each
of us need to be mindful of now.
Even when you talk to
forestry, I did a documentary
on the forest one time, and I
remember sitting with someone
from the forest department,
the California Department
of Forestry, and saying,
"But look around here,
you don't have the debris
that is a real firehouse
tagged for removal.
You have this beautiful sugar
pine, large, you know, very old,
sugar pine tag to be
logged, what's up with that?
She was very uncomfortable
in answering,
but she said, "We
need the money."
So it was-- she was a very I
think vulnerable moment for her
on a career level and one of
the most honest I had heard
from any official participant
in the logging industry.
The fact was to maintain
another portion of the forest,
they needed money, and so they
were coaling the beautiful trees
that should not have
been coaled.
You know, this is the
opposite of what you're talking
about in the kind of forestry
that you were involved with.
>> Yeah. I mean we
were primarily thinning
to promote forest health and
healthy bigger trees that later,
more mature wood get logged.
>> Right.
>> And would be replaced
by other as [inaudible].
>> I mean they're starting in
a serious decline end, yeah
>> So we learned a lot together.
>> Yes.
>> You know, and I enjoyed
the process of learning
about the woods in that way.
>> And it is interesting too,
many years ago I had the
experience of hearing
from someone I have a great deal
of respect for about the nature
of forest and the
intelligence of forest and doing
at the way you're talking about
is so much more appropriate or--
and even more so just a natural
forest that takes care of itself
through fire and so forth which
you can't like range anymore
because with houses
built in them.
>> True.
>> But it was talking
about the fact
that forest have intelligence
as families, as clans,
that the information and
knowledge of the process
of living and growth and
regeneration is passed
on from one generation
to another.
And we don't tend to think
of static objects as living
with a large degree of
consciousness and connectedness,
but that's our mistake.
>> Yeah, there are many cultures
that have an understanding
of plants including trees as
being fairly high, you know,
fairly highly evolved
creatures and beings.
>> Yes.
>> You know, perhaps
smarter than us.
>> In many ways.
>> That there's-- there are
African traditions I read
where they say, you
know, they don't need
to make noise to communicate.
>> Yes.
>> And then animals
they make noise,
they don't need the language.
And we're kind of lame,
because we need lame.
>> We need a lot of noise
and language to communicate.
>> And it was kind of
interesting the reversal
of our typical thinking.
>> Another area you went
into and this is leading
up to the fact that you
ultimately ended up in the world
of hunting which was a
giant leap forward for you.
But you were asking
some questions and one
of them was how do we reconcile
that animals naturally
kill other animals.
And we separate ourselves
out as something different
that we are part animal.
So let's talk about that debate
you went through in your mind
and your views of that.
>> Yeah. One of the arguments
that often made for hunting,
you know, in defense
of hunting is
that well animals
prey on each other.
It's natural.
Predation is natural
and absolutely it is.
And I think that we have made
some real mistakes in thinking
about human life as
being a certain length
and a certain way
of dying as natural.
So like natural causes
and natural life span.
So we think, okay, I'm
going to live to be 70, 80,
90, that's what I expect.
And if I die in this way
that's natural causes.
But if I get taken down
by a mountain lion,
that's not natural causes,
that's something else.
We're not part of that system
and we think ourselves
as food, as prey.
But when we think about the
animal world and predation
of the animal world, we often
project that I think and say,
predation we know it's natural,
but it cut short a life.
It cuts bird that could
technically live to 5
or 8 years, only lives
to 6 weeks or a year.
And I think it's a mistake for
us to make that kind of leap
and project our moral notions
onto the natural world.
But I also think it's a mistake
in that defense of hunting
to say, well animals do
it, why shouldn't we do it.
Because, yes we're animal of
course, but we also have a moral
and compassionate, you
know, a moral logic
and ideally a compassionate
heart which is allows us
to make choices about that.
And so, I wrestled
with the recognition
of just how much life
and death is going
on all the time around me.
It's something that I
didn't see very often,
but when I saw it reminded me,
"Oh, yeah, this is constant.
This is how most
creatures live and die."
Predation is perhaps the
most natural way to go
for most species--
carnivores ,predators,
even though there's a lot
of gray area, you know,
chicken will attack
and eat mouse.
So, you know--
>> Chicken hawks
will eat the chicken.
>> That's right.
>> And on and on.
>> There are some
large carnivores
that are never really prey,
but they're relatively few,
you know, and they
eventually get eaten too.
They decompose and
smaller creatures eat them,
they get them, make it
scavenge and actually gets
down to the microbes,
you know, we're all food.
And the philosopher Val
Plumwood who I mentioned
in this wonderful message,
she wrote about the experience
of being attack by a crocodile
which I mentioned in the book.
She talks about both the
shock of being reduced to prey
and narrowly surviving it.
She also talks about the
western culture illusion
that we aren't part
of the food system,
that we aren't positioned
in this web of food.
So I over time started to become
more comfortable with that.
Both myself as a potential
predators as I begin to think
about the possibility of
hunting and myself as,
you know, part of the system.
And I get buried in
the pine box, you know.
I'll be part of that tree
and maybe part of that trout
and maybe part of
that deer someday.
>> Right. It sounds to me,
I mean really what you've done
is you were taking the hypocrisy
out of your life experience.
I mean there is a lot of
hypocrisy, and you say,
"Oh I'm so against killing," and
then you go to the grocery store
and buy a neatly plastic wrapped
pound of sirloin or a trout
or whatever and you were
essentially saying I'm not going
to do that.
I'm not going to play that game.
If I'm going to do it I'm
going to look at in the eye
and take full responsibility
for what I'm doing.
Now, the other part of
this debate comes down to--
yes, if you need to hunt and
this is part of your sustenance
and as you said when you
became a vegan, you didn't need
to eat that fish that day.
Now, how did you bridge
that gap into hunting
which is I don't need
to, but I'm going to?
What was that debate
in your mind?
>> There were a couple of
things that drew me to hunting.
One was that ethical
confrontation,
that taking responsibility.
Another was hunting as a
different way of like forestry,
a different way of interacting
with the landscape
that I live in.
I'm part of this
natural community here.
And when I started to hunt and
pay attention to animal sign,
I learned things that I
didn't learn as a hiker
or as a bird watcher
as a canoeist you know,
the things like this.
But that's central debate,
that central question
of I don't need to hunt.
I don't need to take of that
particular animal's life.
I can let that animal walk away.
That remained and it didn't
just get resolved for me,
because that question is
one, I think that all hunters
to some extent live with.
And I've heard many stories
from hunter who have seen animal
that is legal to take
and perhaps the kind
of animal very specifically they
went out to take the life of,
and sometimes it just
doesn't feel right
and that you choose not to.
You know, that moment
is not right.
What the reasons are?
Maybe they can't even explain,
but for whatever reason.
So I remained ambivalent
as I stepped into the woods
for the first time and then
the second time, the third time
and it took quite a while before
I even had to really face it,
because hunting is
actually quite difficult.
>> You're right.
>> In many cases.
>> Right.
>> But it was one I was
constantly living with.
Would I kill?
And if so, how would that feel
and what would that
choice be like?
>> That is that I can--
I can only imagine how
difficult it is not having been
in that position, not that
many women don't hunt.
There are women who do hunt.
But this was something that was
really driven home in a movie
which I adore this movie.
1995, the movie Powder, about
unusual young man who lived
in a community that was based
on living close to the land
and hunting, and we're going
to show a little clip of it.
This is what happened when
one of his family friends,
one of the older men went out
hunting and the boy was able
to bridge the intelligence's
information between the deer
and the man who had hunted him.
And we'll just show that.
It's a pretty profound scene.
>> [Background Music] Now,
that's a perfect
hit right there.
That's a perfect shot.
That's a clean kill
right through the heart.
You all see that?
Now, what she's doing now.
It's just her nerves dying.
Suffering's minimal when
you know what you're doing.
>> What the hell are
you doing out here?
>> Now listen to me, you didn't
see any of this, you hear?
Now, you just back
out of here boy.
[ Music ]
[Background Music] Now,
now, stay away from it.
It ain't dead yet, stupid.
>> Well, what the
hell's with you, man?
>> Oh let's get this moron
out of here before he
gets himself kicked.
[Music & Noise]
>> What's he doing?
>> What's you're doing, man?
Hey come on!
>> Harley?
>> Let Harley go!
>> Oh, my God!
>> God!
>> Cut it out, man!
>> Stop, man!
>> Somebody do something!
>> Say something man!
>> Are you okay?
>> Some make him stop.
>> It doesn't matter what
you do, just make him stop!
Somebody make him stop!
Come on!
>> Come on, man!
>> Harley!
He's giving him a heart
attack or something!
>> Let him go!
>> Harley!
Harley!
>> Do something, John!
>> Let him go, you freak!
[Noise]
>> He's going to
have a heart attack.
>> Let him go.
Now, let him go.
Do it!
>> Put the goddamn
gun down, John.
>> Do it! [Gun Shot]
>> Harley!
Harley, calm down!
>> Are you okay?
Harley?
>> Break it up, guys.
>> Come on.
Okay. [Noise]
[ Music ]
[ Music & Noise ]
>> It always gets
to me when I see
that particular one that's very
emotional scene for a purpose.
And the thing that
he was pointing out,
I mean he transferred all
the feelings of the animal
into the man and
then of course he--
after he felt, he would be quit
hunting, but the reality is
that animal is maimed and
there is very big part of this
that requires not just, you
know, the social responsibility
that you're talking about,
environmental responsibility,
but also the skill to
be able to do this well.
So, you don't have
a scene like this.
>> Yeah.
>> And so let's talk about
that, how did that go for you
and the whole motion of maiming
versus killing and what happens
when you go to kill but you end
up accidentally maiming maybe
because of a lack of
skill or what not.
>> Yeah, a couple
thoughts come to mind,
one is that many cultures
and actually including sort
of European hunter traditions
have stories and rituals
in which the hunter and
the hunted reverse roles
and the hunter becomes
the hunted.
And so I think that that
there's a lot of wisdom in that,
it's not unlike the scene in
some ways, deeply imbedded
in a lot of hunting
cultures traditions.
And for me the fear
of maiming an animal,
the fear of not having
an instant
or nearly instant
kill was a deep one
and I've interviewed a lot
of hunters who particularly
who came to hunting as adults,
I did some graduate research
on this, and it's a
very common deep fear.
That is the last thing that
people want to experience.
And frankly it's true for a
lot of lifelong hunters too.
You know, my uncle has
been hunting since he was
in his teens and he has had the
experience of wounding an animal
and not finding it, and not
knowing whether it survived
or not.
Despite being a very
disciplined, very skilled hunter
and he has come close in his
mind to not doing it again
because it such a painful
emotional experience to-- -
>> I would think you'd
take that home with you.
>> Very much so.
And any hunter I've
talked to who has had
that experience has expressed
a lot of regret and some doubts
about what they would
do next time.
>> Right.
>> And certainly
perhaps about the choice
that they made in that moment.
So, for me learning marksmanship
and being disciplined
about the choices that I
made in terms of the shots
that I'd be willing to
take was quite important.
I also had a very humbling
experience when I was
out there I think in
my second or third--
my second season
of hunting deer.
When I took a shot
and completely missed
as with the bow and
I mostly it's hunting
with a firearm 'cause for me
I feel much more confident
to be able to make that
quick instant kill,
but at that time I
was hunting with a bow
and I completely missed.
What came over me was a
deep shame that I have made
such a bad choice
because that could
so easily have been a wound,
if I had that little
control over, over that shot.
And even though the range
was good and I had practiced
and all that, it was-- the
conditions were such that I--
that I made, you
know, quite a missed.
And that already
enforced my commitment
to making better choices.
And then I went-- made
another mistake just like it.
[laughs] It was, you know,
deeply humbling to realize
that whatever your
marksmanship skills
and whatever your
good intentions
and whatever your ethics, you
can still have bad judgment
and make a poor choice
in the moment.
And I think that's
something we all hunters lived
with as a potential.
The better they get, the
better their discipline
and the better their,
you know, their judgment,
the less likely I think
that is to happen.
And thankfully for me it has--
I've never actually
wounded an animal and the--
but the fear of doing
it remains with me.
>> What about-- I know that
in your book you stated that,
"It's not as though
there's a joy in killing."
But for some of the hunters
there is a joy in killing.
This is a different
mindset, you know?
>> Yeah.
>> To go out and there's
an actual joy or thrill
that takes place in
having taken another life.
And I would think it's a fine
line between being grateful
that you did it well
and having that thrill
of taking another life.
How is that defined to you
and among the people
that you see as well?
>> It's a difficult and
tricky terrain to navigate.
Are there people out there
who genuinely enjoy doing harm
and inflicting pain
and inflicting death?
Sure. Some of them are hunters;
some of them are not hunters,
whether those people are
more common among hunters
than among the general
population,
I don't know, I'm not sure.
Those people exist.
That mindset, that
sadism essentially exist
in the world we all know this
whether it's afflicted on humans
or animals, or whatever.
But I also think there's a
lot of gray area and a lot
of misinterpretation
of the joy in the hunt.
And I have essay coming
out later this year about--
I call it, "Killing and
Grinning and smiling,
the ethics of emotion."
Now, when we see a
picture of a hunter
with a dead animal who's--
and the hunter is
smiling into the camera.
That symbol, that image
evokes very different sorts
of responses in us depending
on our feelings about hunting
and our experiences,
and a lot of this,
what is the smile about?
What is that?
Is it pride in having
accomplished something,
and perhaps a still-- a charge
of energy from the hunt,
you know, that, you
know, it's intense.
There's energy in it and that
can come out in the smile.
And there can be joy in having
done something well especially
who is difficult.
That's very different
interpretation
from the way I used to
interpret those pictures
which is this is sadism,
this is joy in death,
this is joy in the act of
killing in that precise act not
in the whole process of the hunt
and perhaps some
pride and success.
So, I find myself needing
to not judge too quickly
and to really try to understand.
You know, there are people
I don't want to hunt with,
there are plenty of people that
I'd be happy to hang out with,
but I would not hunt with just
through the emotion, attitude,
ethics, philosophy,
it doesn't match mine
so I won't hunt with
that person.
But I also want to remain
open to the possibility
that their attitude or their
emotion doesn't carry necessary
the negative moral conditions
that I might suspect.
So, there's-- it's tricky--
a tricky [inaudible].
>> It has been and thank you for
explaining your feelings on that
and how you've gone through
that that transformation
of viewing it from
way into another.
And it-- you bring up
another really big point
and that is we are part
animals, we are competitive
with each other, you
can get into a lot
of different philosophical
debates on why that is,
and yet we separate ourselves
out as being other than the rest
of the animal kingdom and
that there is natural prey
and there is a natural affinity
for hunting among
the animal kingdom,
why are humans not
considered natural predators?
>> Yeah, I think
it's good question.
There's, you know,
archeological evidence
that we were both hunting
and scavenging as, you know,
hominids or pre-humans
millions of years ago,
a million to two
million years ago.
So and chimpanzees
also hunt monkeys.
You know, it doesn't-- that's
not the bulk of their diet
but it's part of the
primate experience, you know?
>> Right.
>> And I think the argument
is that though we might
in some sense be natural
predators we're also very
cultural predators.
If we are predators it's
very culturally constructed
and framed in very
different ways, in, you know,
in different cultures
around the world.
So, some cultures values will
say, "We hunt in this way
but we don't hunt at all or
we hunt in this other ways."
And so it is certainly not
just nature expressing itself,
it's perhaps some kind of
nature expressing itself and lot
of cultural and culture
expressing themselves as well.
>> On that note let's talk
about the Africans and the kudu.
Let's talk about that
and I also want to get
into the Tibetan path for
consuming animal flesh
which is what quite
convoluted and interesting.
So, we see how we
each deal with this,
how different cultures deal with
it, let's talk about the kudu.
>> Sure. So, in one of David
Attenborough's nature series I
believe in it's in the series
Mammals, the last section
of that is about
the human mammal
and he has a wonderful scene
where several Kalahari san
Bushmen are hunting a kudu
and this is this ancient form
of hunting called
the persistence hunt
which means they chase it down,
they run for hours tracking
with incredible skill until the
animal basically falls over.
And I saw that before I
started hunting, in the end one
of the hunters kills, kills
the kudu and then kneels
down beside it and
sprinkled sand on it,
and just like holy water,
the way he does it it's
like a priest, you know,
sprinkling holy water
and he take some saliva
from the corner of his mouth
and rubs his own legs which
are aching after eight hours
or something of running.
>> The warrior rubs--
the hunter rubs--
>> On his own legs.
>> -- his legs with the
saliva from the kudu?
>> Exactly, to ease the
pain and he sits there
and strokes it and, you
know, basically, it says,
a prayer of thanksgiving for
the food that will feed him,
and his family, and
his village and such.
And there was something terrible
and also beautiful about that
and it's hard to explain but it
really resonated with me in ways
that we're both sort of
heart opening and kind
of overwhelming, is awesome
in literal sense of--
the old sense of awe.
It was something that informed
the spirit of my notion
about hunting not that I'm
going to mimic the way they hunt
or their rituals per se
but the spirit of it,
something that made
a lot of sense
at a emotional or
spiritual level.
>> When there is a very
large level of investment,
and stamina, and it sounds
as though skill and heart
on behalf of the hunters.
>> Yeah.
>> The Kalahari hunters.
>> Wasn't an easy, it wasn't
an easy catch for them.
>> No, not at all.
>> And then also let's
talk about the Tibetans.
>> Yeah.
>> I-- feel this
fascinating reading this
in your book I thought,
"Well okay."
>> Yeah.
>> There tends to be a bit of,
it seems almost hypocrisy
in it, okay.
>> Yeah, [inaudible] of Dalai
Lama is not a vegetarian.
So he became vegetarian after
witnessing the slaughter
of a chicken and he writes
about this in his autobiography.
And then he-- I believe
he had hepatitis.
He has a particular
health condition
where his health
decline very quickly.
Even on a vegetarian diet I
think he may have still been
eating dairy or something but
his doctors said, "No, no,
no you have to continue to
eat some meat and flesh."
So, he relates his
own experience a bit
but he also talks about
the Tibetan Buddhist ethic,
this is back in the
1960s or '70s at least,
the Tibetan Buddhist ethic
of eating meat which is
that you can eat meat
but you can't kill
and you can't go and order it.
The only-- so you can't
essentially directly trigger the
killing of an animal.
>> Or order the killing
of the animal.
>> You can't order it because
then it might be killed
specifically for
you and bad karma.
>> Right.
>> So, the dilemma is
how do we eat them?
It was a staple local diet.
They had barley bread, and
meat, and some other things
but it was real staple.
So, they would have
local Muslims do it.
So, they would farm it out just
like we do in the supermarket.
>> Isn't that ordering
it so to speak?
>> Yeah, but I don't know
exactly what you meant
by ordering, but you know,
you could go to a like I think
like a, you know, say a butcher
shop where there was meat
but you couldn't say, "I
don't see any meat here,
I'd like some meat and
then [inaudible] come
up back," you know?
[laughter] You know, so
it's a very convoluted.
>> But that's not terribly
different from what we all do
when we go to the
supermarket, really.
>> Exactly and that's--
that's what I realized that
it was not that different.
But my sense of it was, "Gosh,
why should that be
less bad karma?"
>> You're right.
>> Should not be more bad karma?
It's like willful
ignorance [laughs].
>> Right, a will-- yes
a willful ignorance.
Was there-- you know, I've
interviewed so many people
from many different
backgrounds philosophically,
religious in terms of
religions and so forth.
And one thought that has come up
or one philosophy that has come
up a few times has been that on
a very deep and ancient level
that there has been an agreement
between the plant kingdom
and the animal kingdom,
and the animal kingdom
and the human kingdom as well
in terms of permissions to be
of service and to
give sustenance.
And I don't know that that
particularly resonates for you
but on a really deep level,
give-- just share as--
a kind of a final thought, we
only have a couple minutes left
on what this has brought back
to your life besides personal
accountability obviously.
>> Yeah, you know, many cultural
traditions do tell these stories
about permission and about an
agreement between the hunter
and the hunted in such.
And I don't personally
have that word view.
I didn't grow up in it.
It makes sense to me in
a way but I'm not sure.
For me when I finally
took the life of a deer,
when I finally did do that in
my fourth year as a hunter,
it was devastating and I wasn't
sure I would ever do it again,
but it was the process of
doing the whole butchering,
the whole disassembly
of this animal
that though I wasn't looking
forward to it and it was sort
of unpleasant, it in itself
became a kind of ritual
through which I came to
a place, sort of a piece
with this is somehow
appropriate,
this is somehow fitting whether
the deer gave me permission
or not, is another question
but somehow this is an
appropriate way of me
and the deer part of
this place on the land.
>> Interesting, the whole thing.
I applaud you and
your courage to go
through that entire
journey all the way,
taking it all the way through.
I don't think most of
us would have the--
maybe a mental or
emotional stamina
to see it all the way
through, and you've done that,
and you've chronicle
it beautifully.
So--
>> Thank you.
>> -- thank you for writing
the Mindful Carnivore.
We're all in varying stages
of questioning our place
in this whole system.
Thank you so much.
>> Thank you, thank you.
>> Tovar's story is
very personal and rich
with emotional dilemma, it
certainly strikes to the heart
of what many mindful consumers
are forced to consider.
The book is titled; The Mindful
Carnivore and you can find it
on all major book sellers.
Until next time, thank
you for joining us here
on Gaiam TV [phonetic].
[ Music ]
[ Silence ]